Natural Language Processing (NLP)
Natural Language Processing is the discipline of building machines that can manipulate language in the way that it is written, spoken, and organized
19 min. readView original
Introduction
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is one of the hottest areas of artificial intelligence (AI) thanks to applications like text generators that compose coherent essays, chatbots that fool people into thinking they’re sentient, and text-to-image programs that produce photorealistic images of anything you can describe. Recent years have brought a revolution in the ability of computers to understand human languages, programming languages, and even biological and chemical sequences, such as DNA and protein structures, that resemble language. The latest AI models are unlocking these areas to analyze the meanings of input text and generate meaningful, expressive output.
Natural language processing (NLP) is the discipline of building machines that can manipulate human language — or data that resembles human language — in the way that it is written, spoken, and organized. It evolved from computational linguistics, which uses computer science to understand the principles of language, but rather than developing theoretical frameworks, NLP is an engineering discipline that seeks to build technology to accomplish useful tasks. NLP can be divided into two overlapping subfields: natural language understanding (NLU), which focuses on semantic analysis or determining the intended meaning of text, and natural language generation (NLG), which focuses on text generation by a machine. NLP is separate from — but often used in conjunction with — speech recognition, which seeks to parse spoken language into words, turning sound into text and vice versa.
NLP is an integral part of everyday life and becoming more so as language technology is applied to diverse fields like retailing (for instance, in customer service chatbots) and medicine (interpreting or summarizing electronic health records). Conversational agents such as Amazon’s Alexa and Apple’s Siri utilize NLP to listen to user queries and find answers. The most sophisticated such agents — such as GPT-3, which was recently opened for commercial applications — can generate sophisticated prose on a wide variety of topics as well as power chatbots that are capable of holding coherent conversations. Google uses NLP to improve its search engine results, and social networks like Facebook use it to detect and filter hate speech. 
NLP is growing increasingly sophisticated, yet much work remains to be done. Current systems are prone to bias and incoherence, and occasionally behave erratically. Despite the challenges, machine learning engineers have many opportunities to apply NLP in ways that are ever more central to a functioning society.
NLP is used for a wide variety of language-related tasks, including answering questions, classifying text in a variety of ways, and conversing with users. 
Here are 11 tasks that can be solved by NLP:
Sentiment analysis is the process of classifying the emotional intent of text. Generally, the input to a sentiment classification model is a piece of text, and the output is the probability that the sentiment expressed is positive, negative, or neutral. Typically, this probability is based on either hand-generated features, word n-grams, TF-IDF features, or using deep learning models to capture sequential long- and short-term dependencies. Sentiment analysis is used to classify customer reviews on various online platforms as well as for niche applications like identifying signs of mental illness in online comments.
NLP sentiment analysis illustration
Toxicity classification is a branch of sentiment analysis where the aim is not just to classify hostile intent but also to classify particular categories such as threats, insults, obscenities, and hatred towards certain identities. The input to such a model is text, and the output is generally the probability of each class of toxicity. Toxicity classification models can be used to moderate and improve online conversations by silencing offensive comments, detecting hate speech, or scanning documents for defamation. 
Machine translation automates translation between different languages. The input to such a model is text in a specified source language, and the output is the text in a specified target language. Google Translate is perhaps the most famous mainstream application. Such models are used to improve communication between people on social-media platforms such as Facebook or Skype. Effective approaches to machine translation can distinguish between words with similar meanings. Some systems also perform language identification; that is, classifying text as being in one language or another. 
Named entity recognition aims to extract entities in a piece of text into predefined categories such as personal names, organizations, locations, and quantities. The input to such a model is generally text, and the output is the various named entities along with their start and end positions. Named entity recognition is useful in applications such as summarizing news articles and combating disinformation. For example, here is what a named entity recognition model could provide: 
named entity recognition NLP
Spam detection is a prevalent binary classification problem in NLP, where the purpose is to classify emails as either spam or not. Spam detectors take as input an email text along with various other subtexts like title and sender’s name. They aim to output the probability that the mail is spam. Email providers like Gmail use such models to provide a better user experience by detecting unsolicited and unwanted emails and moving them to a designated spam folder. 
Grammatical error correction models encode grammatical rules to correct the grammar within text. This is viewed mainly as a sequence-to-sequence task, where a model is trained on an ungrammatical sentence as input and a correct sentence as output. Online grammar checkers like Grammarly and word-processing systems like Microsoft Word use such systems to provide a better writing experience to their customers. Schools also use them to grade student essays. 
Topic modeling is an unsupervised text mining task that takes a corpus of documents and discovers abstract topics within that corpus. The input to a topic model is a collection of documents, and the output is a list of topics that defines words for each topic as well as assignment proportions of each topic in a document. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), one of the most popular topic modeling techniques, tries to view a document as a collection of topics and a topic as a collection of words. Topic modeling is being used commercially to help lawyers find evidence in legal documents. 
Text generation, more formally known as natural language generation (NLG), produces text that’s similar to human-written text. Such models can be fine-tuned to produce text in different genres and formats — including tweets, blogs, and even computer code. Text generation has been performed using Markov processes, LSTMs, BERT, GPT-2, LaMDA, and other approaches. It’s particularly useful for autocomplete and chatbots.
Autocomplete predicts what word comes next, and autocomplete systems of varying complexity are used in chat applications like WhatsApp. Google uses autocomplete to predict search queries. One of the most famous models for autocomplete is GPT-2, which has been used to write articles, song lyrics, and much more. 
Chatbots automate one side of a conversation while a human conversant generally supplies the other side. They can be divided into the following two categories:
Database query: We have a database of questions and answers, and we would like a user to query it using natural language. 
Conversation generation: These chatbots can simulate dialogue with a human partner. Some are capable of engaging in wide-ranging conversations. A high-profile example is Google’s LaMDA, which provided such human-like answers to questions that one of its developers was convinced that it had feelings.
Information retrieval finds the documents that are most relevant to a query. This is a problem every search and recommendation system faces. The goal is not to answer a particular query but to retrieve, from a collection of documents that may be numbered in the millions, a set that is most relevant to the query. Document retrieval systems mainly execute two processes: indexing and matching. In most modern systems, indexing is done by a vector space model through Two-Tower Networks, while matching is done using similarity or distance scores. Google recently integrated its search function with a multimodal information retrieval model that works with text, image, and video data.
information retrieval illustration
Summarization is the task of shortening text to highlight the most relevant information. Researchers at Salesforce developed a summarizer that also evaluates factual consistency to ensure that its output is accurate. Summarization is divided into two method classes:
Extractive summarization focuses on extracting the most important sentences from a long text and combining these to form a summary. Typically, extractive summarization scores each sentence in an input text and then selects several sentences to form the summary.
Abstractive summarization produces a summary by paraphrasing. This is similar to writing the abstract that includes words and sentences that are not present in the original text. Abstractive summarization is usually modeled as a sequence-to-sequence task, where the input is a long-form text and the output is a summary.
Question answering deals with answering questions posed by humans in a natural language. One of the most notable examples of question answering was Watson, which in 2011 played the television game-show Jeopardy against human champions and won by substantial margins. Generally, question-answering tasks come in two flavors:
Multiple choice: The multiple-choice question problem is composed of a question and a set of possible answers. The learning task is to pick the correct answer. 
Open domain: In open-domain question answering, the model provides answers to questions in natural language without any options provided, often by querying a large number of texts.
NLP models work by finding relationships between the constituent parts of language — for example, the letters, words, and sentences found in a text dataset. NLP architectures use various methods for data preprocessing, feature extraction, and modeling. Some of these processes are: 
Data preprocessing: Before a model processes text for a specific task, the text often needs to be preprocessed to improve model performance or to turn words and characters into a format the model can understand. Data-centric AI is a growing movement that prioritizes data preprocessing. Various techniques may be used in this data preprocessing:
Stemming and lemmatization: Stemming is an informal process of converting words to their base forms using heuristic rules. For example, “university,” “universities,” and “university’s” might all be mapped to the base univers. (One limitation in this approach is that “universe” may also be mapped to univers, even though universe and university don’t have a close semantic relationship.) Lemmatization is a more formal way to find roots by analyzing a word’s morphology using vocabulary from a dictionary. Stemming and lemmatization are provided by libraries like spaCy and NLTK. 
Sentence segmentation breaks a large piece of text into linguistically meaningful sentence units. This is obvious in languages like English, where the end of a sentence is marked by a period, but it is still not trivial. A period can be used to mark an abbreviation as well as to terminate a sentence, and in this case, the period should be part of the abbreviation token itself. The process becomes even more complex in languages, such as ancient Chinese, that don’t have a delimiter that marks the end of a sentence. 
Stop word removal aims to remove the most commonly occurring words that don’t add much information to the text. For example, “the,” “a,” “an,” and so on.
Tokenization splits text into individual words and word fragments. The result generally consists of a word index and tokenized text in which words may be represented as numerical tokens for use in various deep learning methods. A method that instructs language models to ignore unimportant tokens can improve efficiency.  
tokenizers NLP illustration
Feature extraction: Most conventional machine-learning techniques work on the features – generally numbers that describe a document in relation to the corpus that contains it – created by either Bag-of-Words, TF-IDF, or generic feature engineering such as document length, word polarity, and metadata (for instance, if the text has associated tags or scores). More recent techniques include Word2Vec, GLoVE, and learning the features during the training process of a neural network.
Bag-of-Words: Bag-of-Words counts the number of times each word or n-gram (combination of n words) appears in a document. For example, below, the Bag-of-Words model creates a numerical representation of the dataset based on how many of each word in the word_index occur in the document. 
tokenizers bag of words nlp
TF-IDF: In Bag-of-Words, we count the occurrence of each word or n-gram in a document. In contrast, with TF-IDF, we weight each word by its importance. To evaluate a word’s significance, we consider two things:
Term Frequency: How important is the word in the document?
TF(word in a document)= Number of occurrences of that word in document / Number of words in document
Inverse Document Frequency: How important is the term in the whole corpus?
IDF(word in a corpus)=log(number of documents in the corpus / number of documents that include the word)
A word is important if it occurs many times in a document. But that creates a problem. Words like “a” and “the” appear often. And as such, their TF score will always be high. We resolve this issue by using Inverse Document Frequency, which is high if the word is rare and low if the word is common across the corpus. The TF-IDF score of a term is the product of TF and IDF. 
tokenizers tf idf illustration
Word2Vec, introduced in 2013, uses a vanilla neural network to learn high-dimensional word embeddings from raw text. It comes in two variations: Skip-Gram, in which we try to predict surrounding words given a target word, and Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW), which tries to predict the target word from surrounding words. After discarding the final layer after training, these models take a word as input and output a word embedding that can be used as an input to many NLP tasks. Embeddings from Word2Vec capture context. If particular words appear in similar contexts, their embeddings will be similar.
GLoVE is similar to Word2Vec as it also learns word embeddings, but it does so by using matrix factorization techniques rather than neural learning. The GLoVE model builds a matrix based on the global word-to-word co-occurrence counts. 
Modeling: After data is preprocessed, it is fed into an NLP architecture that models the data to accomplish a variety of tasks.
Numerical features extracted by the techniques described above can be fed into various models depending on the task at hand. For example, for classification, the output from the TF-IDF vectorizer could be provided to logistic regression, naive Bayes, decision trees, or gradient boosted trees. Or, for named entity recognition, we can use hidden Markov models along with n-grams. 
Deep neural networks typically work without using extracted features, although we can still use TF-IDF or Bag-of-Words features as an input. 
Language Models: In very basic terms, the objective of a language model is to predict the next word when given a stream of input words. Probabilistic models that use Markov assumption are one example:
P(Wn)=P(Wn|Wn−1)
Deep learning is also used to create such language models. Deep-learning models take as input a word embedding and, at each time state, return the probability distribution of the next word as the probability for every word in the dictionary. Pre-trained language models learn the structure of a particular language by processing a large corpus, such as Wikipedia. They can then be fine-tuned for a particular task. For instance, BERT has been fine-tuned for tasks ranging from fact-checking to writing headlines. 
Most of the NLP tasks discussed above can be modeled by a dozen or so general techniques. It’s helpful to think of these techniques in two categories: Traditional machine learning methods and deep learning methods. 
Traditional Machine learning NLP techniques: 
Logistic regression is a supervised classification algorithm that aims to predict the probability that an event will occur based on some input. In NLP, logistic regression models can be applied to solve problems such as sentiment analysis, spam detection, and toxicity classification.
Naive Bayes is a supervised classification algorithm that finds the conditional probability distribution P(label | text) using the following Bayes formula:
P(label | text) = P(label) x P(text|label) / P(text) 
and predicts based on which joint distribution has the highest probability. The naive assumption in the Naive Bayes model is that the individual words are independent. Thus: 
P(text|label) = P(word_1|label)*P(word_2|label)*…P(word_n|label)
In NLP, such statistical methods can be applied to solve problems such as spam detection or finding bugs in software code. 
Decision trees are a class of supervised classification models that split the dataset based on different features to maximize information gain in those splits.
decision tree NLP techniques
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) is used for topic modeling. LDA tries to view a document as a collection of topics and a topic as a collection of words. LDA is a statistical approach. The intuition behind it is that we can describe any topic using only a small set of words from the corpus.
Hidden Markov models: Markov models are probabilistic models that decide the next state of a system based on the current state. For example, in NLP, we might suggest the next word based on the previous word. We can model this as a Markov model where we might find the transition probabilities of going from word1 to word2, that is, P(word1|word2). Then we can use a product of these transition probabilities to find the probability of a sentence. The hidden Markov model (HMM) is a probabilistic modeling technique that introduces a hidden state to the Markov model. A hidden state is a property of the data that isn’t directly observed. HMMs are used for part-of-speech (POS) tagging where the words of a sentence are the observed states and the POS tags are the hidden states. The HMM adds a concept called emission probability; the probability of an observation given a hidden state. In the prior example, this is the probability of a word, given its POS tag. HMMs assume that this probability can be reversed: Given a sentence, we can calculate the part-of-speech tag from each word based on both how likely a word was to have a certain part-of-speech tag and the probability that a particular part-of-speech tag follows the part-of-speech tag assigned to the previous word. In practice, this is solved using the Viterbi algorithm.
hidden markov models illustration
Deep learning NLP Techniques: 
convolutional neural network based text classification
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN): Many techniques for text classification that use deep learning process words in close proximity using n-grams or a window (CNNs). They can see “New York” as a single instance. However, they can’t capture the context provided by a particular text sequence. They don’t learn the sequential structure of the data, where every word is dependent on the previous word or a word in the previous sentence. RNNs remember previous information using hidden states and connect it to the current task. The architectures known as Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and long short-term memory (LSTM) are types of RNNs designed to remember information for an extended period. Moreover, the bidirectional LSTM/GRU keeps contextual information in both directions, which is helpful in text classification. RNNs have also been used to generate mathematical proofs and translate human thoughts into words. 
recurrent neural network illustration
Autoencoders are deep learning encoder-decoders that approximate a mapping from X to X, i.e., input=output. They first compress the input features into a lower-dimensional representation (sometimes called a latent code, latent vector, or latent representation) and learn to reconstruct the input. The representation vector can be used as input to a separate model, so this technique can be used for dimensionality reduction. Among specialists in many other fields, geneticists have applied autoencoders to spot mutations associated with diseases in amino acid sequences. 
auto-encoder
Encoder-decoder sequence-to-sequence: The encoder-decoder seq2seq architecture is an adaptation to autoencoders specialized for translation, summarization, and similar tasks. The encoder encapsulates the information in a text into an encoded vector. Unlike an autoencoder, instead of reconstructing the input from the encoded vector, the decoder’s task is to generate a different desired output, like a translation or summary. 
seq2seq illustration
Transformers: The transformer, a model architecture first described in the 2017 paper “Attention Is All You Need” (Vaswani, Shazeer, Parmar, et al.), forgoes recurrence and instead relies entirely on a self-attention mechanism to draw global dependencies between input and output. Since this mechanism processes all words at once (instead of one at a time) that decreases training speed and inference cost compared to RNNs, especially since it is parallelizable. The transformer architecture has revolutionized NLP in recent years, leading to models including BLOOM, Jurassic-X, and Turing-NLG. It has also been successfully applied to a variety of different vision tasks, including making 3D images.
encoder-decoder transformer
Over the years, many NLP models have made waves within the AI community, and some have even made headlines in the mainstream news. The most famous of these have been chatbots and language models. Here are some of them:
Eliza was developed in the mid-1960s to try to solve the Turing Test; that is, to fool people into thinking they’re conversing with another human being rather than a machine. Eliza used pattern matching and a series of rules without encoding the context of the language.
Tay was a chatbot that Microsoft launched in 2016. It was supposed to tweet like a teen and learn from conversations with real users on Twitter. The bot adopted phrases from users who tweeted sexist and racist comments, and Microsoft deactivated it not long afterward. Tay illustrates some points made by the “Stochastic Parrots” paper, particularly the danger of not debiasing data.
BERT and his Muppet friends: Many deep learning models for NLP are named after Muppet characters, including ELMo, BERT, Big BIRD, ERNIE, Kermit, Grover, RoBERTa, and Rosita. Most of these models are good at providing contextual embeddings and enhanced knowledge representation.
Generative Pre-Trained Transformer 3 (GPT-3) is a 175 billion parameter model that can write original prose with human-equivalent fluency in response to an input prompt. The model is based on the transformer architecture. The previous version, GPT-2, is open source. Microsoft acquired an exclusive license to access GPT-3’s underlying model from its developer OpenAI, but other users can interact with it via an application programming interface (API). Several groups including EleutherAI and Meta have released open source interpretations of GPT-3. 
Language Model for Dialogue Applications (LaMDA) is a conversational chatbot developed by Google. LaMDA is a transformer-based model trained on dialogue rather than the usual web text. The system aims to provide sensible and specific responses to conversations. Google developer Blake Lemoine came to believe that LaMDA is sentient. Lemoine had detailed conversations with AI about his rights and personhood. During one of these conversations, the AI changed Lemoine’s mind about Isaac Asimov’s third law of robotics. Lemoine claimed that LaMDA was sentient, but the idea was disputed by many observers and commentators. Subsequently, Google placed Lemoine on administrative leave for distributing proprietary information and ultimately fired him.
Mixture of Experts (MoE): While most deep learning models use the same set of parameters to process every input, MoE models aim to provide different parameters for different inputs based on efficient routing algorithms to achieve higher performance. Switch Transformer is an example of the MoE approach that aims to reduce communication and computational costs.
Many languages and libraries support NLP. Here are a few of the most useful.
Python is the most-used programming language to tackle NLP tasks. Most libraries and frameworks for deep learning are written for Python. Here are a few that practitioners may find helpful:
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) is one of the first NLP libraries written in Python. It provides easy-to-use interfaces to corpora and lexical resources such as WordNet. It also provides a suite of text-processing libraries for classification, tagging, stemming, parsing, and semantic reasoning.
spaCy is one of the most versatile open source NLP libraries. It supports more than 66 languages. spaCy also provides pre-trained word vectors and implements many popular models like BERT. spaCy can be used for building production-ready systems for named entity recognition, part-of-speech tagging, dependency parsing, sentence segmentation, text classification, lemmatization, morphological analysis, entity linking, and so on.
Deep Learning libraries: Popular deep learning libraries include TensorFlow and PyTorch, which make it easier to create models with features like automatic differentiation. These libraries are the most common tools for developing NLP models.
Hugging Face offers open-source implementations and weights of over 135 state-of-the-art models. The repository enables easy customization and training of the models.
Gensim provides vector space modeling and topic modeling algorithms.
R: Many early NLP models were written in R, and R is still widely used by data scientists and statisticians. Libraries in R for NLP include TidyText, Weka, Word2Vec, SpaCyR, TensorFlow, and PyTorch.
Many other languages including JavaScript, Java, and Julia have libraries that implement NLP methods.
NLP has been at the center of a number of controversies. Some are centered directly on the models and their outputs, others on second-order concerns, such as who has access to these systems, and how training them impacts the natural world. 
Stochastic parrots: A 2021 paper titled “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?” by Emily Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Margaret Mitchell examines how language models may repeat and amplify biases found in their training data. The authors point out that huge, uncurated datasets scraped from the web are bound to include social biases and other undesirable information, and models that are trained on them will absorb these flaws. They advocate greater care in curating and documenting datasets, evaluating a model’s potential impact prior to development, and encouraging research in directions other than designing ever-larger architectures to ingest ever-larger datasets.
Coherence versus sentience: Recently, a Google engineer tasked with evaluating the LaMDA language model was so impressed by the quality of its chat output that he believed it to be sentient. The fallacy of attributing human-like intelligence to AI dates back to some of the earliest NLP experiments. 
Environmental impact: Large language models require a lot of energy during both training and inference. One study estimated that training a single large language model can emit five times as much carbon dioxide as a single automobile over its operational lifespan. Another study found that models consume even more energy during inference than training. As for solutions, researchers have proposed using cloud servers located in countries with lots of renewable energy as one way to offset this impact. 
High cost leaves out non-corporate researchers: The computational requirements needed to train or deploy large language models are too expensive for many small companies. Some experts worry that this could block many capable engineers from contributing to innovation in AI. 
Black box: When a deep learning model renders an output, it’s difficult or impossible to know why it generated that particular result. While traditional models like logistic regression enable engineers to examine the impact on the output of individual features, neural network methods in natural language processing are essentially black boxes. Such systems are said to be “not explainable,” since we can’t explain how they arrived at their output. An effective approach to achieve explainability is especially important in areas like banking, where regulators want to confirm that a natural language processing system doesn’t discriminate against some groups of people, and law enforcement, where models trained on historical data may perpetuate historical biases against certain groups.
“Nonsense on stilts”: Writer Gary Marcus has criticized deep learning-based NLP for generating sophisticated language that misleads users to believe that natural language algorithms understand what they are saying and mistakenly assume they are capable of more sophisticated reasoning than is currently possible.
If you are just starting out, many excellent courses can help.
If you want to learn more about NLP, try reading research papers. Work through the papers that introduced the models and techniques described in this article. Most are easy to find on arxiv.org. You might also take a look at these resources: 
The Batch: A weekly newsletter that tells you what matters in AI. It’s the best way to keep up with developments in deep learning.
NLP News: A newsletter from Sebastian Ruder, a research scientist at Google, focused on what’s new in NLP. 
Papers with Code: A web repository of machine learning research, tasks, benchmarks, and datasets.
We highly recommend learning to implement basic algorithms (linear and logistic regression, Naive Bayes, decision trees, and vanilla neural networks) in Python. The next step is to take an open-source implementation and adapt it to a new dataset or task. 
Conclusion
NLP is one of the fast-growing research domains in AI, with applications that involve tasks including translation, summarization, text generation, and sentiment analysis. Businesses use NLP to power a growing number of applications, both internal — like detecting insurance fraud, determining customer sentiment, and optimizing aircraft maintenance — and customer-facing, like Google Translate. 
Aspiring NLP practitioners can begin by familiarizing themselves with foundational AI skills: performing basic mathematics, coding in Python, and using algorithms like decision trees, Naive Bayes, and logistic regression. Online courses can help you build your foundation. They can also help as you proceed into specialized topics. Specializing in NLP requires a working knowledge of things like neural networks, frameworks like PyTorch and TensorFlow, and various data preprocessing techniques. The transformer architecture, which has revolutionized the field since it was introduced in 2017, is an especially important architecture.
NLP is an exciting and rewarding discipline, and has potential to profoundly impact the world in many positive ways. Unfortunately, NLP is also the focus of several controversies, and understanding them is also part of being a responsible practitioner. For instance, researchers have found that models will parrot biased language found in their training data, whether they’re counterfactual, racist, or hateful. Moreover, sophisticated language models can be used to generate disinformation. A broader concern is that training large models produces substantial greenhouse gas emissions.
This page is only a brief overview of what NLP is all about. If you have an appetite for more, DeepLearning.AI offers courses for everyone in their NLP journey, from AI beginners and those who are ready to specialize. No matter your current level of expertise or aspirations, remember to keep learning!
Natural Language Processing (NLP) Tutorial
Your All-in-One Learning Portal: GeeksforGeeks is a comprehensive educational platform that empowers learners across domains-spanning computer science and programming, school education, upskilling, commerce, software tools, competitive exams, and more.
By GeeksforGeeks
3 min. readView original
Last Updated : 23 Jul, 2025
Suggest changes
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a branch of Artificial Intelligence (AI) that helps machines to understand and process human languages either in text or audio form. It is used across a variety of applications from speech recognition to language translation and text summarization.
Natural Language Processing can be categorized into two components:
1. Natural Language Understanding: It involves interpreting the meaning of the text.
2. Natural Language Generation: It involves generating human-like text based on processed data.
Phases of Natural Language Processing
It involves a series of phases that work together to process and interpret language with each phase contributing to understanding its structure and meaning.
Phases-of-Natural-Language-Processing
Phases of NLP
For more details you can refer to: Phases of NLP
Libraries for NLP
Some of natural language processing libraries include:
Normalizing Textual Data in NLP
Text Normalization transforms text into a consistent format improves the quality and makes it easier to process in NLP tasks.
Key steps in text normalization includes:
1. Regular Expressions (RE) are sequences of characters that define search patterns.
2. Tokenization is a process of splitting text into smaller units called tokens.
3. Lemmatization reduces words to their base or root form.
4. Stemming reduces works to their root by removing suffixes. Types of stemmers include:
5. Stopword removal is a process to remove common words from the document.
6. Parts of Speech (POS) Tagging assigns a part of speech to each word in sentence based on definition and context.
Text Representation and Embedding Techniques in NLP
Lets see how these techniques works in NLP.
Text representation Techniques
It converts textual data into numerical vectors that are processed by the following methods:
Text Embedding Techniques
It refers to methods that create dense vector representations of text, capturing semantic meaning including advanced approaches like:
1. Word Embedding
2. Pre-Trained Embedding
3. Document Embedding
4. Advanced Embeddings
Deep Learning Techniques for NLP
Deep learning has revolutionized Natural Language Processing by helping models to automatically learn complex patterns from raw text.
Key deep learning techniques in NLP include:
Pre-Trained Language Models
Pre-trained models can be fine-tuned for specific tasks:
Natural Language Processing Tasks
Core NLP tasks that help machines understand, interpret and generate human language.
1. Text Classification
2. Information Extraction
3. Sentiment Analysis
4. Machine Translation
5. Text Summarization
6. Text Generation
Natural Language Processing Chatbots
NLP chatbots are computer programs designed to interact with users in natural language helps in seamless communication between humans and machines. By using NLP techniques, these chatbots understand, interpret and generate human language.
Applications of NLP
Voice Assistants: 
Alexa, Siri and Google Assistant use NLP for voice recognition and interaction.
Grammar and Text Analysis:
 Tools like Grammarly, Microsoft Word and Google Docs apply NLP for grammar checking.
Information Extraction:
 Search engines like Google and DuckDuckGo use NLP to extract relevant information.
Chatbots:
 Website bots and customer support chatbots leverage NLP for automated conversations.
For more details you can refer to: Applications of NLP
Importance of NLP
Natural Language Processing (NLP) plays an important role in transforming how we interact with technology and understand data. Below are reasons why it’s so important:
Information Extraction:
 Extracts useful data from unstructured content.
Sentiment Analysis: 
Analyzes customer opinions for businesses.
Automation:
 Streamlines tasks like customer service and document processing.
Language Translation:
 Breaks down language barriers with tools like Google Translate.
Healthcare: 
Assists in analyzing medical records and research.
For more details you can refer to: Why is NLP important?
Natural language processing
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of artificial intelligence (AI) that uses machine learning to help computers communicate with human language.
By Cole Stryker, Jim Holdsworth
10 min. readView original
What is NLP?
Natural language processing (NLP) is a subfield of computer science and artificial intelligence (AI) that uses machine learning to enable computers to understand and communicate with human language.
NLP enables computers and digital devices to recognize, understand and generate text and speech by combining computational linguistics, the rule-based modeling of human language together with statistical modeling, machine learning and deep learning.
NLP research has helped enable the era of generative AI, from the communication skills of large language models (LLMs) to the ability of image generation models to understand requests. NLP is already part of everyday life for many, powering search engines, prompting chatbots for customer service with spoken commands, voice-operated GPS systems and question-answering digital assistants on smartphones such as Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri and Microsoft’s Cortana.
NLP also plays a growing role in enterprise solutions that help streamline and automate business operations, increase employee productivity and simplify business processes.
Benefits of NLP
NLP makes it easier for humans to communicate and collaborate with machines, by allowing them to do so in the natural human language they use every day. This offers benefits across many industries and applications.
Automation of repetitive tasks
Improved data analysis and insights
Enhanced search
Content generation
Automation of repetitive tasks 
NLP is especially useful in fully or partially automating tasks like customer support, data entry and document handling. For example, NLP-powered chatbots can handle routine customer queries, freeing up human agents for more complex issues. In document processing, NLP tools can automatically classify, extract key information and summarize content, reducing the time and errors associated with manual data handling. NLP facilitates language translation, converting text from one language to another while preserving meaning, context and nuances.
Improved data analysis
NLP enhances data analysis by enabling the extraction of insights from unstructured text data, such as customer reviews, social media posts and news articles. By using text mining techniques, NLP can identify patterns, trends and sentiments that are not immediately obvious in large datasets. Sentiment analysis enables the extraction of subjective qualities, attitudes, emotions, sarcasm, confusion or suspicion from text. This is often used for routing communications to the system or the person most likely to make the next response.
This allows businesses to better understand customer preferences, market conditions and public opinion. NLP tools can also perform categorization and summarization of vast amounts of text, making it easier for analysts to identify key information and make data-driven decisions more efficiently.
Enhanced search
NLP benefits search by enabling systems to understand the intent behind user queries, providing more accurate and contextually relevant results. Instead of relying solely on keyword matching, NLP-powered search engines analyze the meaning of words and phrases, making it easier to find information even when queries are vague or complex. This improves user experience, whether in web searches, document retrieval or enterprise data systems.
Powerful content generation
NLP powers advanced language models to create human-like text for various purposes. Pre-trained models, such as GPT-4, can generate articles, reports, marketing copy, product descriptions and even creative writing based on prompts provided by users. NLP-powered tools can also assist in automating tasks like drafting emails, writing social media posts or legal documentation. By understanding context, tone and style, NLP sees to it that the generated content is coherent, relevant and aligned with the intended message, saving time and effort in content creation while maintaining quality.
Approaches to NLP
NLP combines the power of computational linguistics together with machine learning algorithms and deep learning. Computational linguistics uses data science to analyze language and speech. It includes two main types of analysis: syntactical analysis and semantical analysis. Syntactical analysis determines the meaning of a word, phrase or sentence by parsing the syntax of the words and applying preprogrammed rules of grammar. Semantical analysis uses the syntactic output to draw meaning from the words and interpret their meaning within the sentence structure.
The parsing of words can take one of two forms. Dependency parsing looks at the relationships between words, such as identifying nouns and verbs, while constituency parsing then builds a parse tree (or syntax tree): a rooted and ordered representation of the syntactic structure of the sentence or string of words. The resulting parse trees underly the functions of language translators and speech recognition. Ideally, this analysis makes the output either text or speech understandable to both NLP models and people.
Self-supervised learning (SSL) in particular is useful for supporting NLP because NLP requires large amounts of labeled data to train AI models. Because these labeled datasets require time-consuming annotation, a process involving manual labeling by humans, gathering sufficient data can be prohibitively difficult. Self-supervised approaches can be more time-effective and cost-effective, as they replace some or all manually labeled training data.
Three different approaches to NLP include:
Rules-based NLP
The earliest NLP applications were simple if-then decision trees, requiring preprogrammed rules. They are only able to provide answers in response to specific prompts, such as the original version of Moviefone, which had rudimentary natural language generation (NLG) capabilities. Because there is no machine learning or AI capability in rules-based NLP, this function is highly limited and not scalable.
Statistical NLP
Developed later, statistical NLP automatically extracts, classifies and labels elements of text and voice data and then assigns a statistical likelihood to each possible meaning of those elements. This relies on machine learning, enabling a sophisticated breakdown of linguistics such as part-of-speech tagging.
Statistical NLP introduced the essential technique of mapping language elements, such as words and grammatical rules to a vector representation so that language can be modeled by using mathematical (statistical) methods, including regression or Markov models. This informed early NLP developments such as spellcheckers and T9 texting (Text on 9 keys, to be used on Touch-Tone telephones).
Deep learning NLP
Recently, deep learning models have become the dominant mode of NLP, by using huge volumes of raw, unstructured data both text and voice to become ever more accurate. Deep learning can be viewed as a further evolution of statistical NLP, with the difference that it uses neural network models. There are several subcategories of models:
Transformer models: They use tokenization of language (the position of each token words or subwords) and self-attention (capturing dependencies and relationships) to calculate the relation of different language parts to one another. Transformer models can be efficiently trained by using self-supervised learning on massive text databases. A landmark in transformer models was Google’s bidirectional encoder representations from transformers (BERT), which became and remains the basis of how Google’s search engine works.
Autoregressive models: This type of transformer model is trained specifically to predict the next word in a sequence, which represents a huge leap forward in the ability to generate text. Examples of autoregressive LLMs include GPT, Llama, Claude and the open-source Mistral.
Foundation models: Prebuilt and curated foundation models can speed the launching of an NLP effort and boost trust in its operation. For example, the IBM® Granite™ foundation models are widely applicable across industries. They support NLP tasks including content generation and insight extraction. Additionally, they facilitate retrieval-augmented generation, a framework for improving the quality of response by linking the model to external sources of knowledge. The models also perform named entity recognition which involves identifying and extracting key information in a text.
NLP Tasks
Several NLP tasks typically help process human text and voice data in ways that help the computer make sense of what it’s ingesting. Some of these tasks include:
Coreference resolution
This is the task of identifying if and when two words refer to the same entity. The most common example is determining the person or object to which a certain pronoun refers (such as “she” = “Mary”). But it can also identify a metaphor or an idiom in the text (such as an instance in which “bear” isn’t an animal, but a large and hairy person). 
Named entity recognition (NER)
NER identifies words or phrases as useful entities. NER identifies “London” as a location or “Maria” as a person's name.
Part-of-speech tagging
Also called grammatical tagging, this is the process of determining which part of speech a word or piece of text is, based on its use and context. For example, part-of-speech identifies “make” as a verb in “I can make a paper plane,” and as a noun in “What make of car do you own?”
Word sense disambiguation
This is the selection of a word meaning for a word with multiple possible meanings. This uses a process of semantic analysis to examine the word in context. For example, word sense disambiguation helps distinguish the meaning of the verb “make” in “make the grade” (to achieve) versus “make a bet” (to place). Sorting out “I will be merry when I marry Mary” requires a sophisticated NLP system.
How NLP works
NLP works by combining various computational techniques to analyze, understand and generate human language in a way that machines can process. Here is an overview of a typical NLP pipeline and its steps:
Text preprocessing
NLP text preprocessing prepares raw text for analysis by transforming it into a format that machines can more easily understand. It begins with tokenization, which involves splitting the text into smaller units like words, sentences or phrases. This helps break down complex text into manageable parts. Next, lowercasing is applied to standardize the text by converting all characters to lowercase, ensuring that words like "Apple" and "apple" are treated the same. Stop word removal is another common step, where frequently used words like "is" or "the" are filtered out because they don't add significant meaning to the text. Stemming or lemmatization reduces words to their root form (e.g., "running" becomes "run"), making it easier to analyze language by grouping different forms of the same word. Additionally, text cleaning removes unwanted elements such as punctuation, special characters and numbers that may clutter the analysis.
After preprocessing, the text is clean, standardized and ready for machine learning models to interpret effectively.
Feature extraction
Feature extraction is the process of converting raw text into numerical representations that machines can analyze and interpret. This involves transforming text into structured data by using NLP techniques like Bag of Words and TF-IDF, which quantify the presence and importance of words in a document. More advanced methods include word embeddings like Word2Vec or GloVe, which represent words as dense vectors in a continuous space, capturing semantic relationships between words. Contextual embeddings further enhance this by considering the context in which words appear, allowing for richer, more nuanced representations.
Text analysis
Text analysis involves interpreting and extracting meaningful information from text data through various computational techniques. This process includes tasks such as part-of-speech (POS) tagging, which identifies grammatical roles of words and named entity recognition (NER), which detects specific entities like names, locations and dates. Dependency parsing analyzes grammatical relationships between words to understand sentence structure, while sentiment analysis determines the emotional tone of the text, assessing whether it is positive, negative or neutral. Topic modeling identifies underlying themes or topics within a text or across a corpus of documents. Natural language understanding (NLU) is a subset of NLP that focuses on analyzing the meaning behind sentences. NLU enables software to find similar meanings in different sentences or to process words that have different meanings. Through these techniques, NLP text analysis transforms unstructured text into insights.
Model training
Processed data is then used to train machine learning models, which learn patterns and relationships within the data. During training, the model adjusts its parameters to minimize errors and improve its performance. Once trained, the model can be used to make predictions or generate outputs on new, unseen data. The effectiveness of NLP modeling is continually refined through evaluation, validation and fine-tuning to enhance accuracy and relevance in real-world applications.
Different software environments are useful throughout the said processes. For example, the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) is a suite of libraries and programs for English that is written in the Python programming language. It supports text classification, tokenization, stemming, tagging, parsing and semantic reasoning functionalities. TensorFlow is a free and open-source software library for machine learning and AI that can be used to train models for NLP applications. Tutorials and certifications abound for those interested in familiarizing themselves with such tools.
Challenges of NLP 
Even state-of-the-art NLP models are not perfect, just as human speech is prone to error. As with any AI technology, NLP comes with potential pitfalls. Human language is filled with ambiguities that make it difficult for programmers to write software that accurately determines the intended meaning of text or voice data. Human language might take years for humans to learn and many never stop learning. But then programmers must teach natural language-powered applications to recognize and understand irregularities so their applications can be accurate and useful. Associated risks might include:
Biased training
As with any AI function, biased data used in training will skew the answers. The more diverse the users of an NLP function, the more significant this risk becomes, such as in government services, healthcare and HR interactions. Training datasets scraped from the web, for example, are prone to bias.
Misinterpretation
As in programming, there is a risk of garbage in, garbage out (GIGO). Speech recognition, also known as speech-to-text, is the task of reliably converting voice data into text data. But NLP solutions can become confused if spoken input is in an obscure dialect, mumbled, too full of slang, homonyms, incorrect grammar, idioms, fragments, mispronunciations, contractions or recorded with too much background noise.
New vocabulary
New words are continually being invented or imported. The conventions of grammar can evolve or be intentionally broken. In these cases, NLP can either make a best guess or admit it’s unsure and either way, this creates a complication.
Tone of voice
When people speak, their verbal delivery or even body language can give an entirely different meaning than the words alone. Exaggeration for effect, stressing words for importance or sarcasm can be confused by NLP, making the semantic analysis more difficult and less reliable.
NLP use cases by industry
NLP applications can now be found across virtually every industry.
Finance
In financial dealings, nanoseconds might make the difference between success and failure when accessing data, or making trades or deals. NLP can speed the mining of information from financial statements, annual and regulatory reports, news releases or even social media.
Healthcare
New medical insights and breakthroughs can arrive faster than many healthcare professionals can keep up. NLP and AI-based tools can help speed the analysis of health records and medical research papers, making better-informed medical decisions possible, or assisting in the detection or even prevention of medical conditions.
Insurance
NLP can analyze claims to look for patterns that can identify areas of concern and find inefficiencies in claims processing, leading to greater optimization of processing and employee efforts.
Legal
Almost any legal case might require reviewing mounds of paperwork, background information and legal precedent. NLP can help automate legal discovery, assisting in the organization of information, speeding review and making sure that all relevant details are captured for consideration.